---
# frontmatter
title: The Road to the White (Nationalist) House:Coded Racial Appeals in Donald Trump’s Presidential Campaign
short_title:  he Road to the White (Nationalist) House
subtitle: Subtitle Goes Here
weight: 100   # optional - leave as 100
type: essay
contributor:
  - id: AKatz  # First initial and last name mOlson
    type: secondary  # use secondary for student writer
    first_name: Anna  
    last_name: Katz
    title: Trinity '18
    affiliation: 
    bio: 

abstract:
  "This research analyzes coded racial appeals in Donald J. Trump’s historic presidential campaign.
Through an interdisciplinary exploration of racial dog whistles and grounded in a qualitative
analysis of seventy-three campaign speeches, it aims to show how Trump made racial pandering
the foundation of his campaign and broke new ground in normalizing rhetoric and policy
typically reserved for the radical right. Building on the long tradition of race baiting in American
electoral politics, Trump strategically stirred racial animus with coded appeals targeting three
racial or racialized groups: Latino immigrants, Muslims, and African Americans. He
criminalized Latino immigrants as rapists, murderers, and drug dealers; he justified Islamophobia
under the guise of national security; and he manipulated anti-black racism through the abiding
dog whistle frames of “law and order” and manipulative welfare recipients. Drawing on a variety
of rhetorical strategies from defiant political incorrectness to nostalgia for former American
“greatness,” Trump couched his strategic racism within a post-racial façade, enabling him and
his supporters to espouse white nationalist ideology while denying personal racism. Through
examining Trump’s coded racial appeals and their effectiveness, this research highlights the
widespread, enduring and often unconscious investment in white supremacy in the United States,
and the role it continues to play in shaping American politics."

---

This thesis is about Donald J. Trump’s historic presidential campaign. It analyzes
how a politically inexperienced businessman built on the long tradition of race baiting in
American electoral politics to stir racial animus and ultimately become the forty-fifth
President of the United States. Through an interdisciplinary exploration of racial dog
whistles and grounded in a qualitative analysis of seventy-three campaign speeches, it
argues that Trump made racial pandering the foundation of his campaign and broke new
ground in normalizing rhetoric and policy typically reserved for the radical right. While
explicit racial language was notably absent from his speeches, Trump used coded dog
whistles to target three racial and racialized groups: Latino immigrants, Muslims, and
African Americans. By coupling dog whistle racism with the denigration of political
correctness, nostalgia for a bygone era, and his famed campaign slogan “Make America
Great Again,” Trump built a politics that trumpeted a white nationalist ideology while
maintaining plausible deniability. This research highlights the widespread, enduring, and
often-unconscious investment in white supremacy in the United States, and the role it
continues to play in shaping American politics.
Numerous public commentators have observed that Trump continued to campaign
even after taking office, in what political journalist Charles Homans called “the postcampaign
campaign of Donald Trump.” Likewise, the racial pandering and white
nationalism that undergirded Trump’s campaign—furtively at times, blatantly at others—
remain central features of his presidency. Trump and his administration dominate the
media, with many news articles and opinion pieces exploring his relationship to race,
examining his stance on racial issues, and even debating his personal racism (as
evidenced by the accompanying collage). Yet my research contributes a valuable
distinction amidst this flurry of racial analysis. Trump’s personal racial animus is
irrelevant. Far more significant and insidious is the ease with which he is able to tap into
simmering racial anxieties in our purportedly post-racial society. Trump was hardly the
first politician to practice racial pandering for political gain, and judging by the recent
surge of political candidates on the radical right, he is unlikely to be the last. In failing to
contend with the persistent racial divides and entrenched white supremacy in our nation,
while fully embracing the illusion of racial equality, the United States has developed an
abiding vulnerability. As candidate, Trump exploited this weakness to the fullest. As
president, he continues to fan the flames.
This research represented my attempt to understand the coalescence of factors that
propelled Trump to victory. But a better grasp of the confusing climate surrounding my
political coming of age was only part of what I gained through the process. As an African
and African American Studies scholar, I studied race and racism throughout my
undergraduate years. But this project challenged me to actively apply my knowledge to
the current political moment and better comprehend the abiding significance of white
supremacy in American society and politics. Though I registered for Professor Eduardo
Bonilla-Silva’s class, The Sociology of Race in America, to further my research, it not
only helped me develop my analysis of Trump’s rhetoric but also proved to be one of my
favorite courses in four years at Duke.
Undertaking and completing this project was an enormously challenging, not
infrequently maddening, and ultimately gratifying odyssey. I developed hard,
transferable, and multidisciplinary research skills, from systematic literature reviews to
strong persuasive writing to qualitative textual analysis. Balancing a full course load, job
applications, extracurricular commitments, and social obligations with a yearlong,
intensive research project was trying at times. I certainly had to make sacrifices, but
ultimately strengthened my ability to manage multiple projects and juggle competing
priorities. I developed the confidence that I can conceptualize and complete a long-term
project, even when confronted with unanticipated obstacles and frustrations. As I
transition into my first full-time job in research—a field chosen in part because of this
experience—I feel well prepared to handle the challenges ahead.
Headlines retrieved from the New York Times, the Washington Post, and MSNBC.

