---
# frontmatter
title: "Topaz"
short_title:  "Topaz"
subtitle: Subtitle Goes Here
weight: 100   # optional - leave as 100
type: essay

contributor:
  - id: BXiong   
    type: secondary  
    first_name: Barbara
    last_name: Xiong
    title: Trinity '21
    affiliation: 
    bio: 

abstract: |
  "For almost half my life I have followed Asian-American YouTubers, looking for a way to connect with others that shared the same peculiar intersection of identities. Although by doing so I had gained to some degree an understanding about who Asian-Americans are today, I was virtually unaware about the nuanced history we have. In my 1500-page AP US History textbook, only about 15 pages were dedicated to Asian-American history. By the end of junior-year, I could write up a 3-page essay on the culture and origins of each of the thirteen colonies by memory, but I could probably only write up a paragraph on that of my own race.

  My Writing 101 class Asian American Narratives finally introduced me to the history and stories that have shaped the community I live in today. In addition, I have learned that the same experiences of immigration and exclusion mirror the struggles of other races today. For my final project, I chose to focus on an instance of human rights violation and of identity conflict, that is, Japanese internment. Moreover, I wanted to explore the graphic novel medium, introduced to me by the house course I was taking, Graphic Medicine. When I came across an interview with former internee, Helen Harano, I knew I had found the perfect narrative, with a wealth of opportunities for visual metaphors, to utilize the graphic novel medium. In “Topaz”, I aimed to examine the dichotomy between America’s expectation of loyalty versus the deprivation of freedom of Japanese-Americans, and the resultant identity conflict in a war rhetoric that made being both Japanese and American seemingly impossible. In addition, I wanted to counter that and several other aspects of the war rhetoric and propaganda--from the painting of Japanese-Americans as dangerous enemy aliens, to the government’s attempted dissociation of itself from its violation of human rights, to the censorship of the reality of concentration camps.

  I would like to thank Dr. Thananopavarn for sharing with me the intricate history that high school never taught me, for aiding in the formulation and editing of Topaz, and for helping me develop into a better writer over the semester. In addition, I would like to thank Kelsey Graywill and Omar Khan for bestowing me with their wisdom on the graphic novel medium, and the Deliberations committee for the extensive feedback and help on my graphic novel and artist’s statement."

---

On December 7, 1941, Japan launched a surprise attack on the Hawaiian military base Pearl Harbor. The enemy—and World War II—had finally arrived on American soil, consuming the lives of the American populace eager to demonstrate their nationalism. However, this nationalism excluded 122,000 Japanese-Americans, as they, too, had become the enemy. Under Executive Order 9066, all residents of Japanese ancestry, including naturalized citizens, were to be expelled from their homes and incarcerated in various internment camps across the country (Lee 212). Their property, livelihood, and constitutional liberties were taken away, all under the justification of “military necessity” (Final Report). 
The subject of “Topaz”, nine-year-old Helen Harano, was one of these thousands of Japanese Americans as were her family; their story and values reflected those of many others in the community. Since the majority of the first Japanese-Americans were men, Helen’s father was the first to arrive in America. As he settled down, he, like many others, wanted to start building a family, so he searched for and found Helen’s mother through the picture-bride system, which paired immigrant grooms with prospective brides back in Japan via a matchmaker who would exchange photographs between them (“Picture Brides”). While the women were sometimes in circumstances that obliged them to undergo the process, or became disappointed upon finally meeting their partner-to-be, the story of Helen’s parents’ union was a romantic and idealistic one. Helen’s father was a kind, gentle pacifist, qualities that inspired her mother to fall in love with him. Despite their aspiration to cultivate a family and life in America, and desire for peace, they, too, fell under the label of “enemy aliens” (Executive Order No. 9066). 

The label of “enemy aliens” highlights two notions by which Japanese-Americans became rejected by American society following Pearl Harbor: (1) they were viewed as disloyal, and (2) they were considered eternal foreigners; these beliefs persisted despite over half of the Japanese-American population being naturalized citizens (Ivey et al. 15). Even the U.S. government-led reports indicated that “90 percent of nisei [second-generation Japanese-Americans] and 75 percent of original immigrants were completely loyal to the United States”, some even being called “pathetically eager to show their loyalty” (Lee 213). The government assessed internees’ loyalty through the 1943 “loyalty questionnaire”, from which two questions, 27 and 28, particularly stood out. The former asked if they were willing to serve in the U.S. armed forces if ordered to do so, while the latter asked if they would swear absolute allegiance to the United States and renounce any form of allegiance to Japan. Both questions placed Japanese-Americans in insecure positions. It was ambiguous as to whether or not “willingness” in Question 27 implied volunteering, and it was risky for non-U.S. citizens to renounce their only citizenship. Those who answered “no” to both questions, or refused to answer them entirely, were labeled as disloyal and segregated into concentration camp Tule Lake. However, to be expected of such loyalty as laid out in Questions 27 and 28 by the government, would have been especially complicated for one whose freedoms had been taken away by that same entity. Japanese-Americans wanted to be accepted as American, but following rejection, loss, and betrayal, were reluctant to establish what exactly they owed to America.

For many internees, the first stop on the road of lost freedoms was a temporary detention camp, such as Tanforan Assembly Center in San Bruno, California. Tanforan, formerly a race track, held 7,816 inmates, the majority of whom were from the Bay Area (“Tanforan Detention Facility”); 26 of its 180 barracks were converted from horse stalls. After being processed at Tanforan for a few weeks, the inmates were then sent to the Topaz Relocation Center in Delta, Utah. Topaz, named after a nearby mountain, was located in the Sevier Desert, a “flat, desolate place with temperatures ranging from 106°F to below 0°F”, where dust storms were frequent and foliage was minimal. The camp consisted of 42 residential blocks, each comprised of 12 barracks surrounded by barbed wire and military police (“Topaz”). 

While well-known photographers, such as Ansel Adams and Dorothea Lange, were invited by the War Relocation Authority to photograph the camps, images of the barbed wire and guards were off limits. The government commissioned these photographs to be propaganda, to not only support their stance of military necessity, but also present the camps as “idyllic villages”, rather than infringements of constitutional liberties (“Ansel Adams, Dorothea Lange”). Instead of barbed wire and barracks, they encouraged photographs of smiling internees busy at work, school, and leisure activities, patiently waiting their time until the war ends. While following the regulations set for prohibited imagery, Ansel Adams sought to portray the camps as honestly as he could, capturing the harsh barrenness of the landscape and shadows of the police. Lange approached the task by taking portraits that aimed to “compress intense human emotion into carefully composed frames”. Such photographs included those of schoolchildren sitting on their knees while working on a makeshift table, as well as those of weary, solitary men suffering from the lack of activity. Due to Lange’s known opposition to internment, and to sentimentalize her photographs to fit the government’s narrative, her work ended up censored. 

The graphic novel medium of “Topaz” allows for visual elements such as barbed wire to be featured, in order to counter the visual censorship in addition to the verbal propaganda that served to justify the dismissal of supposed American freedoms--the thwarting of the American dream that was so-called “evacuation” (Final Report). This betrayal by America fueled the confusion underlying Japanese-American identity, surrounded by a war rhetoric that described being Japanese and American as mutually exclusive and that also avoided responsibility for the nation’s violation of its own moral code. In the disarray of feelings and uncertainties, Helen, along with thousands of Japanese-Americans, struggled with their identity, asking the question, “What does it mean to be American?”  Were they American? Stripped from their homes and livelihoods, and denied the freedom so emblematic of American identity, they certainly weren’t treated as such. How could they become American in a society that wouldn’t let them—that entangled “foreign” with “enemy”? How could they be expected of loyalty from those who betrayed them? 
