---
# frontmatter
title: Constructing Memory at Duke and in Durham
short_title:  Constructing Memory
subtitle: Using Memory Studies to Create Social Justice
weight: 100   # optional - leave as 100
type: essay
contributor:
  - id: cKinyua
    type: secondary
    first_name: Christine
    last_name: Kinyua
    title: Trinity '19
    affiliation: 
    bio:
  - id: mKanyogo
    type: secondary
    first_name: Mumbi 
    last_name: Kanyogo
    title: Trinity'19
    affiliation: 
    bio:
  - id: mFertin 
    type: secondary
    first_name: Mary Aline
    last_name: Fertin
    title: Trinity'19
    affiliation: 
    bio: 
image: constructing_memory.jpg
abstract: |
  Abstract needed

---
https://www.activatinghistoryatduke.com/

https://www.activatinghistoryatduke.com/report.html

In the Fall of 2015, following a myriad of racist incidents on Duke’s campus, Patrisse Cullors, Founder of Black Lives Matter, gave a lecture at Duke’s campus. When asked what it would take to dismantle racism at Duke, Cullors answered, "You would need to cease to exist… Institutions like Duke were built on the backs of anti-black racism, and the genocide of indigenous people." 

“Constructing Memory at Duke and in Durham: using memory studies to create social justice,” originally “Memory Bandits,” was a Bass Connections project founded on an intellectual inquiry, proposed by Robin Kirk, that sought to understand how our university could dismantle oppression without ceasing to exist. It is now a living project that seeks to fundamentally transform the institution’s community and the moral principles it operates under, through a reflection on its history. As we mined the archives and mapped the campus’ geopolitical history, we became deeply aware that we were not the first individuals to document Duke’s history for the purposes of justice. The project is part of a long tradition of accountability-making and consciousness-raising on Duke’s campus from Harambee, the Afro-American Society’s 1969 publication, to the Local 77 Newspaper, a publication produced by Duke’s Local 77 labor union. We also knew that our work was a product of a larger political moment following the anti-racist work of Black Lives Matter, the student-worker solidarity initiatives that fueled the 2015 Allen Building Takeover, conversations about the continued gentrification in Durham and institutional reckonings occurring at universities countrywide from Brown to Georgetown. 

Given that our project was influenced by multiple movements and intellectual discourses, we took an interdisciplinary approach. Engaging with cartography expert Tim Stallman and Duke archivists Amy McDonald and Patrick Stawski, we explored the history of Duke both through mapping physical memorials and investigating primary source historical archives. This archival material included newspaper extracts, interviews, correspondence, photographs, reports, meeting minutes, university statements, worker testimonies, timelines, oral and video interviews, bills and receipts. Initially our mapping and cartography research focused on the presence or absence of physical memorials on Duke’s campus. We had an acute awareness of the overwhelming visibility of white, wealthy male monuments. Therefore, we had a desire to confirm what we sensed: Duke was founded on celebrated legacies of white, male achievement, often times at the expense of vulnerable communities. Where we saw white male veneration usurping campus space, we also saw large, gaping absences of critical histories that continue to influence our present in interpersonal and institutional ways. As such we sought to fill some of these gaps through archival research. Here, we found buried stories such as “The Forgotten History of Native Cherokee Boys”[^1] and “The Lettuce Boycott”[^2] among others. These stories were significant because they exposed an ugly dimension of our institution that had been intentionally erased, even as the university celebrated its diverse community. 

We were fascinated with the ways in which excess was embodied and celebrated on campus and the brazen manner in which suffering, marginalization was disremembered from Duke’s public memory. Our project was to complicate our university’s history, beyond processes of tokenization that usually define American universities’ efforts to address matters of oppression and erasure. As we walked around campus cataloguing the various memorials and monuments present in buildings and on lawns we asked ourselves: who is remembered on campus and whose memories are being disremembered? As we went on campus tours to understand the institution from the administration’s point of view, we asked ourselves how is Duke representing itself? 

We invested ourselves in telling the stories we needed and wanted to hear - developing our story bank allowed us to fill in the “blanks” we noticed throughout Duke’s campus. Who we are, the different identities we embody (race, gender, nationality, citizenship status, religion, sexual orientation and ability status) and where we are from added invaluable insight into how we explored the campus archives. For instance, the “Rhodes must fall movement” in South Africa and the UK influenced our discussions on the complexities of dealing with the lasting legacy of a racist colonial figure. Communications with other student/identity groups indicated that this project struck a chord with many students on campus and their questions pulled us in directions we had not considered. We were also influenced by multiple guest speakers and academics such as Barbara Lau, director of the Pauli Murray Project, who talked about how our work intersected with other efforts to document Durham’s history. Underpinning it all was constant reflection and guided inquiry by Professor Kirk (questioning the why and to what end of our choices). Later as the research continued we broke into smaller groups focused on telling fuller, more complex narratives in creative and interesting ways for diverse audiences -- by developing an online, interactive tour of “invisible” sites of historical significance on campus; creating art and proposals for stories we felt required physical memorialization; and a video, highlighting monuments to white supremacy at Duke.

Throughout this process, our team connected with and became inspired by other Universities across the nation looking to reckon with their complex histories, such as Brown University and Yale University. Learning of other instances of student, faculty, and administrative attitudes towards a broad rethinking of the past allowed us to better frame our recommendations and inspired us to continue our work alongside other activists. And yet despite the ways in which this project gave us insight into the possibilities for radical change and transformation in our university, we were also engaged in a scholarly process. As such, the norms and structure prescribed by academia meant that we had to distill an expansive body of work into a 100-page report. This resulted in the exclusion of important stories from the final report that would have impacted some communities at Duke, no matter how small. 

The impact of the project extended beyond the classroom and our own personal academic trajectories. The report, “Activating History for Justice” has been instructive in multiple efforts to instigate campus reckonings including conversations around the removal of the Robert E Lee Statue at Duke’s Chapel and its possible replacement; the creation of the student coalition, People’s State of the University; the racist vandalization of the Mary Lou Williams Center; and most recently the possible renaming of the Carr Building. But most importantly the report continues to circulate between students, faculty, workers, administrative staff, and the wider Durham community. Therefore, acting as an essential source of political education. We hope that it continues to aid others in their fight for justice. For us as a team, this is where the value of the project lies. The fact that our work exists at the intersection of critical scholarly inquiry and social justice means that it is a necessary addition to the body of work that is seeking to improve conditions of vulnerable people in and beyond the academy. It is an iteration of “knowledge in the service to society” that the university hopes to produce. Additionally, our research accounts for large political moments and everyday history, therefore making clear the ways in which policy and discourse have material consequences for students, faculty, workers, administrative staff and nearby residents -- repercussions that have no temporal boundaries. 

The lasting impact on us as a team is that history is not static but is a living body of work. Understanding that single fact helped us break from the idea that our work should only be focused on permanent physical fixes. We feel very strongly that our report and the work that we have done and will continue to do, should challenge the institution to do better and to commit to improving our community continuously. 

For students interested in doing research, our advice is this: pursue what lies in the intersection of your interests and academic trajectory, it will make the unpredictable research process worthwhile.

[^1]:
  Between 1880 and 1881, 12 “Indian boys” from the Eastern band of the Cherokee between the ages of ten and twenty years of age, enrolled at Trinity, under the care of then-president Braxton Craven. They were instructed by various faculty in a separate school from Trinity, dubbed the “Cherokee Industrial School”. This was part of a national policy of assimilation which included the forced re-education of Native Americans in off-reservation boarding schools and day schools, which had been pioneered by Captain Richard Henry Pratt in 1879.

[^2]:
  In 1972 YM-YWCA and other students followed the lead of the United Farm Workers (UFW) and fought to boycott non-UFW lettuce in Duke’s cafeterias. These groups hoped to achieve higher pay, better working conditions and fair union representation for farmworkers.
