---
# frontmatter
title: Rostovtzeff and the Yale Diaspora 
short_title:  Rostovtzeff and the Yale Diaspora 
subtitle: How Personalities and Communities Influenced the Development of North American Papyrology
weight: 100   # optional - leave as 100
type: essay
contributor:
  - id: GStewart
    type: 
    first_name: Gabrielle
    last_name: Stewart
    title: Trinity '18
    affiliation: 
    bio: 

abstract:
  "This is the abstract"

---

I find myself in awe of the timeliness of this project. In tracing the stories that I cover throughout the thesis, I have turned to a variety of archival, unpublished, and other unconventional sources. A lucky coalescence of time and place has made my investigation of these sources possible. I briefly introduce these sources and then reflect upon the harrowing yet invigorating process of embarking upon my first significant research project.

Archival records have played a key role in my investigation. Two collections of papers were central to my research: the Michael I. Rostovtzeff papers and the American Society of Papyrologists records, both archived in the Rubenstein Library. The insights I have drawn from the correspondence, unpublished autobiographies, and even the driest of financial records in these collections has informed the bulk of my analysis in my first and third chapters. As my readers will soon learn, moreover, there is a fascinating story to how these collections wound up in Durham, North Carolina. To acquaint myself with the 1960s Yale Classics Department (the subject of my second chapter), I also made extensive use of the Eric A. Havelock papers, housed at the Sterling Memorial Library at Yale University.

Adding depth to my archival research are interviews I have conducted with North American papyrologists, most of whom who are now retired and have far more exciting things to do than talk to an undergraduate about trends in papyrological scholarship. I am ecstatic that I have had the opportunity to learn from elders in the discipline now, during this critical moment when those who witnessed the early development of North American papyrology first hand are still with us. The observations of Roger Bagnall in particular, with whom I conducted an oral history, have deepened my understanding of not only papyrology, but how papyrologists interact with one another. Dr. Bagnall was so kind as to share with me an unpublished autobiography of his, “A Half-life of Learning,” for my research, and that too has figured significantly in my analysis. 

I ran my manuscript through a text analysis program, and I found that one of my most frequently used words is “community,” which appears 35 times over the course of the paper, three times more than another favorite, Altertumswissenschaft. This makes good sense for multiple reasons. One of the dominant themes weaving through this thesis is how vital community is to papyrological work. While conducting my research, I was able to experience the closeness of this community for myself. When I asked Roger Bagnall and Ann Hanson to interview, both offered to let me stay with them so I could do so in person. The warmth they extended to me—from the donut breakfasts at Roger’s apartment to my late-night prosecco-fueled chats with Ann—has made me feel like I have a place in the amicitia papyrologorum (friendship of papyrologists).

A key fundament of the amicitia papyrologorum is collaboration in research efforts that transcend specialties and geographic boundaries. This thesis granted me the opportunity to, for the first time, take part in an endeavor that required skills, knowledge, and resources of a vast scholarly community. Humanities research, especially inquiries into societies long gone, is often a solitary project; most of my prior research experiences involved cloistering myself in the depths the library to absorb information from musty, old books written by dead people in dead languages—a distinctly impersonal process. The interpersonal components of research were, though not insignificant, incidental to the projects’ content, taking the form of asking a librarian for help locating a book or working through my arguments with a professor. 
This all changed when my advisor, Professor William Johnson, asked me to assist him in reconstructing the institutional history of the American Society of Papyrologists, a project which eventually evolved into the thesis. This task involved interviewing veteran ASP members, peering through people’s personal files in the ASP archives, and collaborating with librarians and archivists to make sense of cryptic and incomplete artifacts. All of a sudden, research became human-centered and interpersonal. All of a sudden, moreover, the past began to coincide with the present, and I realized the lines dividing the two were not as sharp as I had thought. Even when researching the life of Rostovtzeff, whom I could only access through second-hand stories and nearly undecipherable letters, my inquiry felt far more personal than previous biographic research. Instead of conducting a disinterested, Thucydidean analysis of the man’s accomplishments, I found myself seeking a more human-centered exploration of his life in the vein of Herodotus, for whom stories and subjective experiences formed the backbone of his inquiry.

As I embark on a Master of Philosophy in Classical Literature, I plan to wield these insights in my impending projects. The thesis process has taught me that historical research, however technical or however seemingly alien its subjects, is at its finest when it roots itself to present-day humans acting in real-time, transforming itself into a community endeavor. 


