---
# frontmatter
title:  DukeLife Game 4 Good
short_title:  DukeLife 
subtitle: DukeLife 
weight: 100   # optional - leave as 100
type: essay
contributor:
  - id:  IAijazuddin 
    type: 
    first_name: Ismail 
    last_name: Aijazuddin 
    title: Trinity '18
    affiliation: 
    bio: 

contributor:
  - id:  DLeovic 
    type: 
    first_name: Dillon  
    last_name: Leovic 
    title: Trinity '19
    affiliation: 
    bio: 

abstract:
Game4Good is a student-led research project to develop a virtual game that battles gender violence among college students. The team is designing an intervention that empowers students to identify and challenge the cultural norms and behaviors that enable sexual misconduct, and to intervene in situations of danger. The project began with exploration of game design principles in the course Games & Culture Politics, Pleasure and Pedagogy in Fall 2016. This was combined with a review of research into on-campus gender violence and existing interventions. The most pervasive shortfall the team identified in these systems was their didactic method, which generally did not maintain participant engagement. In response to this, the team began to explore model games and mechanics most likely to engage participants and create empathy for victims and bystanders. In the three semesters since, the team has developed a narrative-based decision-making game, DukeLife, that places the player in the position of an entering first-year student at Duke University. The player navigates nuanced situations on campus through the first three months of their first year – recognized as the period in which students are most likely to face sexual violence.1 We have refined the intervention in response to insights from playtests with around 100 students, and continue to adapt the game through collaboration with partnering organizations such as the Duke University Women’s Center.

1.	https://studentaffairs.duke.edu/sites/default/files/2017-07/Student_Experience_Survey_1.pdf

---

Shai and Leo’s Write-Up

The production of knowledge and critical engagement with society, culture or history are no longer the domain or monopoly of formal education. Film, media, the web, and games have, one might argue, become the main channels where knowledge is produced and circulated, challenging if not transforming the hierarchy between academic/professional expertise and popular/amateur beliefs. For the last few years, we have been collaborating with colleagues at Duke University in developing an interdisciplinary approach to gaming and interactive technology exploring social and political issues in education and research. Games’ inherent playfulness, persuasive rhetoric, and ambiguity can shift the discourse from that of utility—as is common when one speaks of technology and the media—to a more deliberate engagement with culture. That is to say, the formal aspects of gaming—design, mechanics, ludic elements—and its social formation—community, interactivity, cultural embeddedness, players’ agency—constitute an important pedagogical site that does not merely allow insights into the cultural functions of games, but also where games with social relevance can be made. The gaming landscape is generally divided between entertainment games and serious games. This distinction is obviously flawed since we see ever more commercial games with pedagogical intentions and as designers of serious games harness entertainment to promote the educational goals of their platforms. Still, the majority of the games on the market today fall into the commercial/fun vs. serious/pedagogy divide. We believe that entertainment and education should not be mutually exclusive and that we all learn better when we are actively participating in knowledge production instead of being told how and what to think. For us, gaming has the potential to radically transform the teacher/authority—student/blank slate dichotomy in education systems throughout the world.  

Two years ago, a number of our students decided to create a narrative game addressing what they consider to be the most pressing issue on campus: gender and sexual violence. Whereas the university requires every incoming student to undergo gender violence and alcohol abuse awareness training by completing two online modules, students find them to be didactic, boring, ineffective and forgettable. The students researched gender violence in US universities, consulted with the Women’s Center at the university, attended monthly meetings on gender violence, conducted surveys on campus life, reviewed theories on game studies and game design, and looked for the most cost-effective and user-friendly platform to create the game. After a three semesters independent study where we met weekly, the result was DukeLife, a narrative-based decision-making game that offers two storylines that simulate everyday life at the university. Unlike the training modules currently in use, DukeLife puts student in the uncomfortable position of a bystander, when whether to intervene or not is unclear and where both “good” and “bad” decisions will have negative consequences. The goal is not for the player to complete the game but to be troubled by the immensity and complexity of the problem. The game is then followed by a reflection session to discuss gameplay and social causes, such as patriarchy and toxic masculinity that are at the root of the problem. The game is not meant to be an end in itself, but a means to open up the conversation through engagement and critical play.

Dillon Leovic Reflection
This project began with the AMES course Games & Culture taught by Shai Ginsburg and Leo Ching. Gaming has undoubtedly become a powerful medium in today’s world, and continues to play a significant role in engaging with and shaping our society. During class and on our own, we were tasked with playing a wide variety of games (board games, strategy, first person shooter, adventure, etc.) with each other to critically analyze user experience and player agency. Between class discussions, playing games, and reading literature, we identified the clear interdependence between gaming and culture, and observed the great potential gaming has to serve as an educational tool.
Following the completion of the course, a group of four students including myself decided to team up with the professors to create a game relevant to Duke’s campus. While brainstorming different ideas/issues to address in the game, we tried to think of the most pressing issues on campus. We narrowed it down to two issues, the lack of Duke Students’ interaction with the Durham Community, and sexual harassment/assault on campus. While debating these two options, we discussed the current model for educating incoming first-year students on gender violence (HAVEN). All of us felt that although a lot of important information was transmitted in HAVEN, we all agreed the game lacked engagement and player agency. With this in mind, we felt there was definitely room to make an impact on gender violence education on campus, and decided to pursue this route.
To start things out, we needed to confirm our assumption that the current model for gender violence education was insufficient. This required each team member to send around surveys to their friends and peers. Drafting these surveys was not an easy task, as we needed to stay objective as possible and wanted to make sure our questions did not contain any bias. After sending the surveys around, our hypothesis was confirmed that HAVEN’s model, although very informative, lacked user engagement and most of the information was forgotten by students.
We decided as a team that the best approach would be to make a narrative. We strived to keep this narrative as relatable as possible to the first year student’s experience, and made the decision to start the narrative during first year orientation (O-week). The intention of our game was to provide an interactive experience in which first years would not only enjoy playing, but also be able to retain the important information the game transmitted. Our most important tool for judging the playability and relatability of our games was through hosting play tests.
Our feedback from our play tests and surveys were critical throughout our game development. One of the most important questions we always asked was “Is this story line relatable or something you think could happen at Duke.” We usually aimed for 50% to keep the content. Statistics from the surveys were extremely important, but perhaps the most important portion was the last question which gave the player the option to give advice/ideas to better improve the game. A lot of times this addressed the mechanics of the games, including the number of playable options, speed, and locations of graphics. Whenever more than one person wrote the same suggestion, we would implement it into the next version of the game and assess its impact in the next play test. 

Of course, we encountered many surprises throughout the two-year game development process. Our knowledge and background in the gaming industry persuaded us to make certain decisions on the game development. Sometimes, our team would develop a component of the game that would receive predominantly negative feedback during play tests. It was important for us to remember the goal of game, which was to cater to the interests of first year students and to provide them with important information while keeping them engaged. With this in mind, we almost always sided on our play testers opinions and changed out design/content when it received mostly negative reviews.

Perhaps the most difficult part of the research process was convincing students to come to the play tests. Our first couple play tests went smoothly, as we were able to select from our different friend groups. However, our research required us to pull from new subject pools, so after a person had play tested the game twice we needed to find new people. Luckily, we received funding to provide free pizza at the tests, which definitely helped convince people to come play. Additionally, one of our team members, Ish, was an RA in a freshmen dorm and was usually able to persuade his residents to come.

This project will certainly leave a lasting impact on me. I gained vital research experience, and have an amazing product to show for it. I learned so many things between the constant interaction with students and the on campus offices that assisted us during our game development. The long duration of the project has allowed me to become very close to my team members and we all appreciate the unique backgrounds and skills we each bring. Not everything was perfect. Deadlines were missed, our game crashed, but in the end this has been the most rewarding opportunity I have had at Duke. I will be forever grateful for being able to conduct research on such an important subject with amazing teammates and for creating a product that will certainly have an impact on the future.


